Added new kb article grid-custom-grouping-order (#2352)
telerik/blazor-docs: knowledge-base/grid-custom-grouping-order.md

---
title: Custom Grouping Order in Grid for Blazor
description: Learn how to implement custom grouping order in the Telerik Grid for Blazor.
type: how-to

> page_title: Implementing Custom Grouping Order in Blazor Grid

Reviewer: Consider a greater variety of keywords, for example use the phrase "sort the groups" in the description. I am also not sure whether it's better to use "group order" or "grouping order", but again, you can use both.

slug: grid-custom-grouping-order
tags: grid, blazor, custom, grouping, order, sorting
res_type: kb
ticketid: 1661227
---

## Environment
<table>
    <tbody>
	    <tr>
	    	<td>Product</td>
	    	<td>Grid for Blazor</td>
	    </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

## Description

> I want to group data programmatically in the Telerik Grid for Blazor by one column, ensuring the grouped order matches a specific sequence rather than the default ascending or descending order. I need to sort groups in a custom way, based on a predefined order of the data received from the backend or a custom pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I want to group data programmatically in the Telerik Grid for Blazor by one column. The group order must match a specific sequence rather than the default ascending or descending order. I need to sort groups in a custom way, based on a predefined order of the data, or a custom pattern.
```

This KB article answers the following questions:
- How can I apply custom sorting to groups in the Grid for Blazor?
- What is the approach to sort Grid groups in a non-standard order?
- Can I define a custom sequence for grouped data in the Grid for Blazor?

## Solution

To achieve custom grouping order in the Telerik Grid for Blazor, follow these steps:

> 1. Bind the Grid with the `OnRead` event to handle data operations manually. Refer to the official documentation for [OnRead]({%slug common-features-data-binding-onread%}) and [Grouping with OnRead]({%slug components/grid/manual-operations%}#grouping-with-onread)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Bind the Grid with the `OnRead` event to handle data operations manually. Refer to the official documentation for [`OnRead`]({%slug common-features-data-binding-onread%}) and [Grouping with `OnRead`]({%slug components/grid/manual-operations%}#grouping-with-onread)
```

> 2. Instead of using the `ToDataSourceResult()` method, group the data with custom code. Each group must be represented by an `AggregateFunctionsGroup` object. For understanding the Grid's expectations, inspect the `datasourceResult` variable structure and content with a debugger, as shown in [Grouping with OnRead]({%slug components/grid/manual-operations%}#grouping-with-onread).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Instead of using the `ToDataSourceResult()` method, group the data with custom code. Each group must be represented by an `AggregateFunctionsGroup` object. To understand the Grid's expectations, inspect the `datasourceResult` variable structure and content with a debugger, as shown in [Grouping with `OnRead`]({%slug components/grid/manual-operations%}#grouping-with-onread).
```

3. Implement custom sorting logic for grouped data based on your specific order requirements (e.g., D, A, C, B) within the `OnRead` method.

4. To display multiple property names and values in group headers, consider using the `GroupHeaderTemplate`.

5. (Optionally) Disable the Grid's `Groupable` setting to hide the group panel if you want to prevent users from modifying the grouping state.

````CSHTML
@using Telerik.Blazor.Components
@using System.Collections.ObjectModel
@using Telerik.DataSource.Extensions
@using Telerik.DataSource

<h1>Custom sort of grouping on a column</h1>

<TelerikGrid OnRead="@ReadItems"
			 TItem="GridDataModel"
			 OnStateInit="@((GridStateEventArgs<GridDataModel> args) => OnGridStateInit(args))"
			 Class="my-grid"
			 Groupable="true"

> 			 Width="100%">

Reviewer: Indentation - `TItem` should be exactly below `OnRead`.
The parameter order should be: OnRead, TItem, Groupable, Class, Width

> 	<GridColumns>

Reviewer: Normally, setting widths to all columns implies horizontal scrolling. Is this your goal here? If not, remove them. If the problem is that columns don't fit in the docs REPL, then you can shorten the cell values and leave the column widths if necessary.

		<GridColumn Title="String 1"
					Field="@nameof(GridDataModel.S1)"
					Width="200px" />
		<GridColumn Title="String 2"
					Field="@nameof(GridDataModel.S2)"
					Width="200px" />
		<GridColumn Title="String 3"
					Field="@nameof(GridDataModel.S3)"
					Width="200px" />
		<GridColumn Title="String 4"
					Field="@nameof(GridDataModel.S4)"
					Width="200px" />
		<GridColumn Title="String 5"
					Field="@nameof(GridDataModel.S5)"

> 					Width="200px" />

Reviewer: The indentation seems off here.

	</GridColumns>
</TelerikGrid>

@code {
	private ObservableCollection<GridDataModel> GridData = new ObservableCollection<GridDataModel>();

> 	private bool UseGroupBy = true;

Reviewer: Why is this necessary? If you really need it, then either make it a `const`, or add `{ get; set; }`

			groups = groups.OrderBy(group => customOrder.IndexOf(group.Key.ToString())).ToList();

			args.Data = groups.Cast<object>().ToList();
		}
		else
		{
			// Data is not grouped, so we can cast directly to GridDataModel
			var orderedData = datasourceResult.Data.Cast<GridDataModel>()
								.OrderBy(item => GetCustomOrderIndex(item.S1))
								.ToList();

			args.Data = orderedData.Cast<object>().ToList();
		}

		args.Total = datasourceResult.Total;
		args.AggregateResults = datasourceResult.AggregateResults;
	}

	private int GetCustomOrderIndex(string? value)
	{
		// Define the custom order
		List<string> customOrder = new List<string> { "Hello world D", "Hello world A", "Hello world C", "Hello world B" };

		// Return the index based on the custom order
		return customOrder.IndexOf(value ?? string.Empty);
	}

	protected void OnGridStateInit(GridStateEventArgs<GridDataModel> args)
	{
		if (UseGroupBy)
		{
			GridState<GridDataModel> desiredState = new GridState<GridDataModel>()
				{
					GroupDescriptors = new List<GroupDescriptor>()
				{
					new GroupDescriptor()
					{
						Member = nameof(GridDataModel.S1),
						MemberType = typeof(string),
					}
				}

> 				};

Reviewer: The tabs and brackets look off here. Is this the formatting that you get when you format the code in Visual Studio?

			args.GridState = desiredState;
		}
	}

	public class GridDataModel
	{
		public int Id { get; init; }
		public string? S1 { get; set; }
		public string? S2 { get; set; }
		public string? S3 { get; set; }
		public string? S4 { get; set; }
		public string? S5 { get; set; }

		public GridDataModel()
		{

> 			// for the grid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			// Editable Telerik components require a parameterless constructor.
```

		}

		public GridDataModel(
			int id,
			string s1, string s2, string s3, string s4, string s5)
		{
			Id = id;
			S1 = s1;
			S2 = s2;
			S3 = s3;
			S4 = s4;
			S5 = s5;
		}
	}
}
````

## See Also

> - [Grid Data Binding - OnRead](https://docs.telerik.com/blazor-ui/common-features/data-binding/onread)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [OnRead Data Binding](https://docs.telerik.com/blazor-ui/common-features/data-binding/onread)
```
